---
layout: post
title: "What the CRaC - Superfast JVM startup"
speaker: "Gerrit Grunwald"
location: "tbd"
state: startpage
---

Unser nächster Vortrag von **Gerrit Grunwald** dreht sich um das Thema **What the CRaC - Superfast JVM startup**.

Der Ort wird noch bekannt gegeben.

### Registration

Wir freuen uns über eure Anmeldung (optional und unverbindlich) auf unserer [Meetup-Seite](https://www.meetup.com/de-DE/mannheim-java-usergroup/events/295820209/).

### Termin

Der Vortrag findet am 19.10.2023 um 19:00 Uhr statt.


### Abstract
In a world where microservices are more and more a standard architecture for Java based applications running in the cloud, the JVM warmup time can become a limitation. Especially when you look at spinning up new instances of an app as response to changes in load, the warmup time can be a problem. Native images are one solution to solve these problems because their statically ahead of time compiled code simply doesn’t have to warmup and so has short startup time. But even with the shorter startup time and smaller footprint it doesn’t come without a drawback. The overall performance might be slower because of the missing JIT optimisations at runtime. There is a new OpenJDK project called CRaC (Coordinated Restore at Checkpoint) which goal it is to address the JVM warmup problem with a different approach. The idea is to take a snapshot of the running JVM, store it in files and restore the JVM at a later point in time (or even on another machine).
This session will give you a short overview of the CRaC project and shows some results from a proof of concept implementation.


### Bio

Gerrit Grunwald is a software engineer that loves coding for around 40 years already. He is a true believer in open source and has participated in popular projects like JFXtras.org as well as his own projects (TilesFX, Medusa, Enzo, SteelSeries Swing, SteelSeries Canvas, JDKMon). 
Gerrit blogs regularly at http://harmonic-code.org, he is an active member of the Java community, where he founded and leads the Java User Group Münster (Germany), he is a JavaOne rockstar and a Java Champion. He is a speaker at conferences and user groups internationally and writes for several magazines.


**Eine Veranstaltung des iJUG e.V., organisiert durch die JUG Mannheim (majug).**

